Board Exam
STUDY GUIDE

Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board

www.hncb.org • exam@hncb.org • 209-224-0003
©NANP/HNCB 2026 Version 5

1

***
SPECIAL
NOTICE

Materials to study for the Board
Exam in Holistic Nutrition

Click here to purchase study materials.

Answers to exam questions can be found in the previous versions of
the texts listed above. However, the Holistic Nutrition Credentialing
Board (HNCB) has adopted the new editions to remain current.

2

Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board (HNCB)
Current Board of Directors & Exam Writing Content Experts
Click here to meet the members of the Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board and our content experts.

The Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board (HNCB) is the credentialing arm of the
National Association of Nutrition Professionals (NANP), a non-profit 501c(6) that was
founded in 2003. It is the mission of the HNCB to provide knowledge-based
examination and credentialing services to holistic nutrition professionals, thereby
promoting a nationally recognized, responsible, and credible body of holistically
educated nutrition professionals who serve as the primary holistic and functional
nutrition resource for consumers, health care professionals, and the media. Distinct
from, but working in an integrative fashion with the allopathic medical community,
HNCB certified professionals work to advance the paradigm for creating health by
adhering to a holistic perspective and empowerment model of nutrition education
and consulting.
Special thanks to the Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board for their unwavering
commitment and many, many hours of dedication to this project. Thanks also to all
those who have participated and contributed to the board exam and study guide
during the past several years.
Copyright© 2023 National Association of Nutrition Professionals (NANP)/Holistic
Nutrition Credentialing Board (HNCB). All rights reserved. The materials in this
study guide are intended for educational purposes only.
Phone: 209-224-0003

Contact the HNCB

Contact the NANP

P.O. Box 348028

www.hncb.org

www.nanp.org

Sacramento, CA 95834

exam@hncb.org

info@nanp.org

NANP/HNCB Office

3

Table of Contents
Holistic Nutrition Overview
Board Exam Study Guide................................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Holistic Nutrition Overview................................................................................................................................................................................ 5
Becoming Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition................................................................................................................................ 6
Becoming a Certified Nutrition Professional (CNP)....................................................................................................................... 6
What does “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®” and/or “Certified Nutrition Professional” mean?.... 7
Professional Conduct................................................................................................................................................................................................ 8

Overview of Exam Qualification & Preparation Process
1. Purpose of a Board Exam...................................................................................................................................................... 10
2. Eligibility Requirements for Board Certification in Holistic Nutrition................................................ 11
3. Eligibility Requirements for Certified Nutrition Professional.................................................................. 12
4. Contact Hours................................................................................................................................................................................ 13
5. Application & Fees..................................................................................................................................................................... 14
6. Exam Proctor Information.................................................................................................................................................. 15
7. Administration of the Exam FAQs................................................................................................................................ 16
8. Preparing for the Exam – Study Tips.......................................................................................................................... 17
9. Exam Structure/ Content Outline/ Key Concepts/ Sample Questions............................................... 20

Domain I: Food & Nutrition ......................................................................................................................................... 21
Domain II: Fundamentals of Anatomy, Physiology, & Biochemistry..................................................... 24
Domain III: Counseling/Ethics/Scope of Practice................................................................................................... 26
Domain IV: Nutrition in Practice........................................................................................................................................ 28
Domain V: Research......................................................................................................................................................................... 32

Answers to sample questions
Domains I-V............................................................................................................................................................................................ 34

4

Board Exam Study Guide
By the Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board (HNCB) & the National Association of Nutrition Professionals (NANP)

Holistic Nutrition Overview
Philosophy of Holistic Nutrition
The philosophy of holistic nutrition is that one’s health is an expression of the complex interplay between the
physical and chemical, mental and emotional, as well as spiritual and environmental aspects of one’s life and
being. Professionals who are trained in holistic nutrition view health and healing from a whole-person
perspective. Using education as a primary tool, holistic nutrition professionals emphasize the building of health
and disease risk-reduction by approaching each person as a unique individual. This requires fully engaging the
individual in his/her health recovery process and honoring his/her innate wisdom by working in an empowering
and cooperative manner to chart a course to optimal health.

The services offered by those “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®” or by a “Certified Nutrition
Professional” are grounded in the following principles:
Biochemical individuality (everyone is unique and has unique nutritional needs)
Whole, naturally grown foods are the best source for optimal nutrition
No miracle nutrients that will cure all ills
Dietary supplementation as health-promoting when used in the appropriate form, dose, and frequency, and is
not a substitute for a good diet
Nutritional well-being coming from the balance between a person’s health-promoting diet and lifestyle
habits, and the nutritionally negating environmental and lifestyle influences

The following services may be offered by those “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®” or by
a “Certified Nutrition Professional,” providing they are in accordance with the laws governing
nutrition education and consulting within their respective state of business:
Evaluate food selection, preparation, and intake
Assess client to determine nutritional imbalances or systemic weaknesses
Guide clients by providing educational material to assist them in understanding the nature of their
imbalance(s) or area(s) of weakness, defining goals, and developing realistic action plans
Work with clients to design targeted nutritional programs that may include the use of specific foods, menu
planning, environmental controls, food preparation techniques, dietary supplements, herbs, and/ or lifestyle
modifications that will support the achievement of their health goals
Guide clients in implementing programs, provide education about various aspects of programs, and offer
ongoing assessment and program modifications to create optimal effectiveness in achieving clients’ health goals
Consult and work integratively with other health professionals to determine nutritional needs of clients
Offer referrals to other health professionals as deemed appropriate
Act as a community educator, develop curriculum and prepare manuals, visual aids, course outlines, and other
materials used in teaching
Plan and provide educational opportunities for the public and other health professionals
Promote health discussions in schools, industry, and community agencies
Prepare and disseminate educational and informational materials
Engage in research, and write research reports and other publications to document and communicate
research findings

5

Becoming Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®
Congratulations on choosing to become “Board

Upon successful passage of the Exam, you will earn a

Certified in Holistic Nutrition®”! The educational

certificate officially recognizing you as, “Board Certified

standards, code of ethics, and practice parameters set

in Holistic Nutrition®”. Please use this title, or “BCHN®”

by the National Association of Nutrition Professionals

in conjunction with the certification or degree granted

(NANP) and the Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board

to you by your school of nutrition study.

(HNCB) are essential to the integrity, credibility, and
protection of the holistic nutrition profession; they are

As an example, a graduate of a program granting

also demanded by the sophisticated health consumer

certification as a “Nutrition Consultant,” who also has a

of today. National board certification is a responsible

master’s degree, would use her designations as such:

first step toward building consumer confidence and

Holly Berry, MS, Nutrition Consultant

gaining wider acceptance among other credentialed

Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®

health professionals.

NOTE: Before using any title, please check the laws in your state. Use of the titles “nutritionist”
and “nutrition counselor” are legislated in some states. To prevent misusing the title, please check
your state laws governing the practice of nutrition.

It is also important that you become familiar with your state’s health freedom legislation. An increasing number of states have
laws that protect the rights of consumers to choose their health providers and provide guidelines for the legal practice of
complementary and alternative health professionals. Click here to learn more about the legal guidelines for practicing nutrition in
your state.

Becoming a Certified Nutrition Professional (CNP)
The NANP also offers the following additional level of certification titled, “Certified Nutrition Professional” or “CNP.”
To qualify, ALL the following criteria must be met:
All requirements of Board Certification (see page 11 for details)
A bachelor’s degree or higher in nutrition or a nutrition-related field of study from a NANP-approved holistic nutrition
program, or an accredited college or university, or an equivalent foreign degree

1,200 Supervised Practice Hours
Special Note: Those who have been in clinical nutrition practice for a minimum of five (5) years can be grandfathered” in by
providing the following:
Evidence of completing 1,500 combined Direct & Indirect Contact Hours (may consist exclusively of Direct Contact Hours
(DCH) but must include a minimum of 750 DCH) – for more information regarding contact hours, please see the BCHN®
“Contact Hours Documentation Form.”

Two (2) additional professional letters of reference

Those who meet these qualifications and who pass the Exam, will earn a certificate officially recognizing them as, “Board
Certified in Holistic Nutrition®” AND a “Certified Nutrition Professional” certificate. This title will be used in conjunction with the
certification or degree granted by the individual’s school of nutrition study.

As an example, a graduate of a bachelor’s degree in nutrition, or a nutrition-related field of study, would use his designations
as such:

Clark Kent, BS
Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®
Certified Nutrition Professional
6

What does “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®”
and/or “Certified Nutrition Professional” mean?

Becoming “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®” and a

Board certification in holistic nutrition means you

“Certified Nutrition Professional” means you have

understand the therapeutic value of whole foods,

earned professional recognition and validation of your

a clean and natural food supply, environmental

knowledge and experience within the realm of holistic

influences on health, and the importance of education

nutrition. To earn such important designations, you

and empowerment in helping people make informed

must document and demonstrate an exceptional level

choices along their unique paths toward optimal

of knowledge and understanding of holistic nutrition, as

health and healing. Holistic nutrition also recognizes

well as how to apply it in a credible and responsible

the impact a person’s mindset has on his/her general

manner to help others.

health and ability to nourish and care for himself/
herself.

Board certification provides you with:
Added credibility by indicating to others that you have met and
continue to meet the educational and ethical standards required
by a professional credentialing body
Assurance for the public, the insurance companies, the medical
community, and other complementary practitioners that you are
aware of, and conduct your business in accordance with, your legal
scope of service and standards of professional conduct

Documentation and validation of your educational and professional
qualifications

An organized professional body of peers that govern the holistic
nutrition profession through the establishment of educational
standards, scope of service, legislative advocacy, and continuing
education requirements, that will be recognized by the public,
health plans, the government, and the greater healthcare community
as a group of qualified, ethical, and professional holistic practitioners
Additionally, competing nutrition organizations have efforts
underway in many states to make it illegal to use specific titles
associated with the word “nutrition.” The bill language in those
states allows only trademarked titles to be used. The NANP took
steps years ago to get the title “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®”
trademarked by the United States Patent and Trademark Office. So,
once you become Board Certified, you’ll be covered.
Becoming a “Certified Nutrition Professional” further provides you
with the credibility of earning your Board Certification, as well as
confirming to your clientele that you have met the required 1,200
supervised practice hours, along with your degree of bachelor’s or
higher in nutrition or a nutrition-related field of study.

7

Professional Conduct
Individuals who sit for the Board Exam will sign the

outlines standards used to determine the propriety

Professional Conduct Agreement of the National

of conduct in relationships with clients, patients,

Association of Nutrition Professionals (NANP), which

colleagues, members of allied professions, and the

is intended to support NANP members individually

public. It also serves as a promise to adhere to the

and collectively in maintaining a high level of

defined “scope of service” of a NANP nutrition

professional conduct. The agreement

professional listed below.

Candidates will agree to adhere to the “Scope of Practice and Standard of Care,” which may
legally include the following, unless otherwise legislated by their state of residence:
1. Advising individuals, families and groups on how to improve diet, lifestyle, and attitude to prevent disease
and promote health. May work with a licensed health provider to help individuals with previously diagnosed
illnesses to identify biochemical imbalances and toxicities that contribute to poor health. Advice and
support is founded on evidence-based and holistic principles.
2. Encouraging clients to disclose their nutritional programs to other health professionals they may be working
with to manage their health.
3. Referring clients to appropriate health professionals for the treatment of disease.
4. Conducting their practice in an ethical, professional, and responsible manner, keeping the well-being and
needs of clients above all else.
5. Fulfilling fifteen (15) continuing education credits per year, or thirty (30) units per two-year period, as required.
Click here to learn about NANP’s Continuing Education requirements.
6. NOT engaging in any of the following activities unless the legal scope of practice allows the individual
practitioner to do so:

Attempting to diagnose illness or prescribe therapy to treat disease.
Recommending anyone to leave their present medical doctor or stop taking prescribed medications.
Claiming or advertising that any substance is a treatment, cure, or preventative for any disease or disorder.
7. Reserving the right to choose whom they will and will not serve.
8. Holding all client information as confidential, unless the client signs an agreement allowing for the release of
information to specified parties.
9. Knowing and practicing within the guidelines of state and federal laws, upholding the dignity and honor of
the profession, and accepting its self-imposed disciplines.
10. Defending our first amendment right of freedom of speech and press to impart truthful information
concerning diet and nutrition, and defending the health freedom right of the public to obtain such data
from the sources that they may choose.

8

Overview of Exam Qualification &
Preparation Process

This part of the study guide contains the following sections:
Section 1: Purpose of a Board Exam
Section 2: Eligibility Requirements for Board Certification in Holistic Nutrition
Section 3: Eligibility Requirements for Certified Nutrition Professional
Section 4: Contact Hours
Section 5: Application & Fees
Section 6: Exam Proctor Information
Section 7: Administration of the Exam FAQs
Section 8: Preparing for the Exam – Study Tips
Section 9: Exam Structure/Content Outline/Key Concepts/Sample Questions

9

1) Purpose of a Board Exam
The purpose of the exam is to serve as an instrument

The exam has been developed in careful stages by a

to qualify holistic nutrition professionals to provide

committee of subject matter experts and then given

nutrition education and consulting services, and serve

thorough review and critique by outstanding

as a quality indicator for consumers looking to consult

representatives of the holistic nutrition and

with an appropriately trained holistic nutrition

psychometric communities. The exam has gone

professional. This certification offers a consistent and

through extensive planning and scrutiny to assure that

validated method to determine who is eligible to offer

it examines multiple facets of nutrition expertise,

holistic nutrition services. The exam serves the

including the fundamentals of diet and nutrition,

profession by increasing its credibility while protecting

anatomy, physiology and biochemistry, counseling,

the public by assuring that holistic nutrition

nutrition in practice, and research skills. Competencies

professionals are thoroughly trained and

evaluated by the exam include knowledge,

knowledgeable.

comprehension, application, and analysis of the above
fundamentals.

10

2. Eligibility Requirements for Board Certification
in Holistic Nutrition
Individuals wishing to become “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®”
must provide documentation of the following qualifying criteria:

A. Professional membership in the NANP. Professional membership is a privilege that is
extended to those who have completed one of the following:
Graduated from a NANP-approved post-graduate program
Graduated from a NANP-approved occupational certificate program
Hold a Bachelor’s, Master’s or Doctorate in Nutrition or related field of study from an accredited college
or university
Are board certified by the American College of Nutrition or the Clinical Nutrition Certification Board, or
by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, or comparable board certification in nutrition
Are licensed health care professionals whose scope of practice legally includes nutritional counseling
and adheres to a natural or holistic model of nutrition (for example: chiropractors, acupuncturists,
nurses, physician’s assistants, medical doctors, naturopathic doctors).

B. Having met the NANP’s educational standards. This means successful completion of studies
in holistic nutrition. A person who has not graduated from a NANP-approved nutrition
program may request an Independent Review of his/her education and qualifications, to
determine eligibility for professional membership. Requirements for the Independent
Review include:
A cover letter stating the desire to become a professional member
A two hundred dollar ($200) review fee
Official transcripts from all relevant educational institutions
Course description materials (i.e. catalog, etc.)
A telephone interview with a representative of the NANP

C. Documentation of 500 hours (includes a minimum of 250 direct contact hours and up to
250 indirect contact hours) of professional experience in holistic nutrition.

Exception for New Graduates*
New graduates from NANP-approved programs may apply to sit for the exam without providing documentation
of 500 contact hours. The candidate will be allowed two (2) years from the date of his/her exam in which to
provide this documentation. Upon passing the exam and until such time that the documentation requirement is
satisfied, the candidate may use the title, “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition® (Candidate).”
* A new graduate is an individual who graduated from a NANP-approved program within the twelve (12)
month period prior to receipt of his/her application by the HNCB to sit for the board exam.

11

3. Eligibility Requirements for Certified
Nutrition Professional
Masters of science or doctoral degree in
nutrition or nutrition-related field of
study (state licensed or certified); or

A. To qualify, the following criteria
must be met:
All requirements of Board Certification as
outlined

Other licensed healthcare professional
whose scope of practice legally includes
the dispensation of nutrition education/
counseling services

A bachelor's degree or higher in nutrition or a
nutrition-related field of study from a NANPapproved holistic nutrition program, or an
accredited college or university, or an equivalent
foreign degree

D. Supervisor Requirements
The Supervisor must:

1,200 Supervised Practice Hours

Sign the Practice Supervisor Approval Form

B. CNP Candidate Requirements

Meet with the candidate twice monthly

Must obtain approval of their Supervisor via
the Practice Supervisor Approval Form (see
below for Supervisor explanation)

Provide written & signed confirmation of
completion of the supervised practice hours

Submission of the Supervised Practice Hours

E. CNP “Grandfathering” parameters for
veteran practitioners

Documentation Form for approval by the HNCB,
upon completion of 1,200 supervised practice
hours

A practitioner may avoid the supervised
practice hours if he/she can provide
documentation for the following:

Examples of acceptable venues for obtaining
supervised practice hours:

1,500 combined direct & indirect contact
hours (may exclusively be direct contact
hours; must be a minimum of 750
direct contact hours). Use Contact Hours
Documentation Form to document these
hours
Minimum of five (5) years in nutrition practice

Internship, residency, or clinical rotation
Clinical practice
Institutional setting
Community setting
Educational setting
Inclusion in Supervised Practice Hours of a
minimum of the following types of experiences:

Two additional professional letters of
reference

Nutrition services, including the following:
Assessment

Exception for New Graduates*

Education, counseling, or management

New graduates may apply to sit for the exam
without providing documentation of 1,200
Supervised Practice Hours. The candidate will be
allowed three (3) years from the date of his/her
exam in which to provide this documentation.
Upon passing the exam and until such time that
the documentation requirement is satisfied, the
candidate may use the title, “Certified Nutrition
Professional (Candidate).”

Monitoring or evaluation
Not all experiences are required to take place
within the same setting or under the same
supervisor. All supervisors must be HNCB
approved (see below for more details).

C. Supervisor Qualifications
Must be approved by the Holistic Nutrition
Credentialing Board (HNCB). A signed Practice
Supervisor Approval Form must be submitted to
the HNCB.
Supervisor Credentials must consist of one
or more of the following with a minimum of
three (3) full-time years of clinical experience in
nutrition care:

* A new graduate is an individual who graduated
with a bachelor’s degree or higher in one of
the subjects described above within the twelve
(12) month period prior to receipt of his/her
application by the HNCB to sit for the board
exam.
Those who meet the requirements above will use
both titles, “Board Certified in Holistic Nutrition®”
and “Certified Nutrition Professionals.”

Certified Nutrition Professional or
12

4. Contact Hours
Direct contact hours:
Definition: Working directly with customers, clients, or students providing nutrition education and/or consulting services.

A. Internship or externship approved by either the NANP/HNCB or your school of study.
Required documentation: a completed and signed Internship/Externship Form.

B. Independent (self) employment providing nutritional consulting services.
Required documentation: (please provide the following):
A copy of your business license
Three (3) case studies (500 word summaries, each)
A log, including client initials (written in by you), date range of services, number of times you consulted
with the client, and the total number of hours you spent with the client. You may include time to prepare
for appointments in your total calculation (e.g., emails, research, writing protocols, phone calls, etc.).

C. Employment as a nutrition consultant or educator of holistic nutrition.
Required documentation: a letter from your employer verifying employment, including the number of hours
you worked and a copy of your job description.

Indirect contact hours:
Definition: Research, writing, or developing educational materials or programs (in holistic nutrition) to be
conducted in a community, business, academic, or clinical environment.

A. Research intern.
Required documentation: a completed and signed Internship/Externship Form.

B. Independent Researcher (e.g., time spent in interviews, reading, performing internet and
literary research) for a publication or educational presentation.
Required documentation: a copy of the article, report, or other formats (e.g., PowerPoint presentation, etc.)
providing the results of your research.

C. Non-research preparation for the creation of a publication or educational presentation, be
it public, recorded, or both (e.g., actual writing and other types of material preparation,
locating and creating dialogue with key individuals, venues, consultants, assistants,
publishers, printers, and publication representatives).
Required documentation: a copy of the article, report, or other formats (e.g., PowerPoint presentation, flash
drive, URL, etc.) providing the actual publication or educational presentation.

Activities conducted as a required part of an educational program, with the explicit exception of internships
and externships, do not qualify toward the 500-hour requirement. The Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board
will determine applicability of unusual experience in individual cases.

NOTE: Please submit all documentation via email, flash drive, or paper format with a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you wish it to be returned. Use Contact Hours Documentation Form to assist in
recording your contact hours.

13

5. Application & Fees
To apply to sit for the Board Exam, please submit the following (materials provided must be adequate to
allow an evaluation of the eligibility of the applicant):

Professional
Past or current instructor, previous employer
(manager role) does not have to be in the
holistic nutrition industry, etc.

1. Be a professional member.
2. Your completed application along with a nonrefundable $129 application fee and $300
examination fee. Voluntary withdrawals will
be honored up to twelve (12) months after the
application date, and the examination fee will be
refunded fifty-percent (50%) up to that point. No
refunds will be offered after the twelve (12) month
period.

Must know candidate a minimum of 1 (one)
year
NOTE: Incomplete applications will not be considered.
To apply to become a CNP, please also submit:
1. A non-refundable $75 processing fee
2. Copy of diploma (bachelor’s or higher)
3. Practice Supervisor Approval Form (provided with
purchase of CNP application)
4. Supervised Practice Hours Documentation Form

3. Documentation of Contact Hours professional
experience in holistic nutrition. Please submit
required documentation as outlined in Sections
2 or 3 above (Eligibility Requirements) of this
study guide, along with the “Contact Hours
Documentation Form” provided with purchase of
exam application.

(provided with purchase of CNP application) –
waived for new graduates

NOTE: Veteran Practitioners may avoid the supervised
practice hours by submitting the following:

4. Copy of diploma(s) and/or certificate(s)
5. Signed and dated Professional Conduct Agreement
(within the application)

1,500 combined Direct & Indirect Contact Hours
(may exclusively be direct contact hours; must be a
minimum of 750 direct contact hours). Use Contact

6. Photo or Headshot
7. Copy of your driver’s license or state-issued
identification

Hours Documentation Form to document these
hours (provided with purchase of exam application);

8. Resume or Curriculum Vitae

and:

9. Copy of any professional license(s) you hold

Minimum of five (5) years in nutrition practice

10. Proof of existing liability insurance is required for

Two (2) additional professional letters of
reference
All fees must be submitted at least four (4) weeks
prior to the examination date. Click here to pay
fees.

all persons providing nutrition consulting services.
Liability insurance is NOT required if you work in
an educational or research setting and are not
providing consulting services (please provide
documentation indicating that you do not provide
consulting services). Not required if your County,
Township, etc. does not require Professional
Liability Insurance to lawfully practice

Mail or email supporting documents to:
Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board P.O. Box

11. Official transcripts from your graduating

348028, Sacramento, CA 95834-8028
exam@hncb.org

institution(s) (to be sent directly to the NANP/HNCB
by the school(s)

NOTE: Applications are good for a twelve (12)
month period. If you do not sit for the exam within
twelve (12) months of applying, you MUST re-apply

12. Two (2) Letters of Reference (one each: professional
and personal, t)o be completed by your references
via the instructed online form after you’ve applied).

and pay the application and/or processing fee(s)
again.

Reference requirements:
Personal

Friend, family member, previous colleague
(same job tier), pastor, etc.

Please note, during the credentialing and re-credentialing
processes, the NANP will query the National Practitioner
Data Bank (NPDB) for any adverse reports made against
you as a practitioner. This includes medical malpractice
payments, certain adverse licensure and clinical privileges
actions, and other adjudicated actions or decisions.

Must know candidate a minimum of 2 (two)
years

14

6. Exam Proctor Information
The Board Exam in Holistic Nutrition is offered online only. The HNCB uses
ProctorU exclusively for exam proctoring.
ProctorU is a live online proctoring service available 24/7 that allows test takers to take exams from anywhere
using a webcam and Internet connection. This service uses live proctors who monitor exams by observing the
student (via webcam) and his/her computer screen in real time. The cost of proctoring via ProctorU is included
in the examination fee. There is no extra charge.

Watch this short video to learn how ProctorU works:
Click Here to Watch Video

Once your application is approved, you will receive additional information about ProctorU, including technical
specifications and information that will allow you to test your system for compatibility.

15

7. Administration of the Exam FAQs
How should I study and prepare for the exam?

Can I retake the exam if I fail?

Joining or forming a study group is a very effective way to

If you fail the board exam and wish to take it again, you must

prepare and study for the Board Exam. Members of NANP can

retake the entire exam within six (6) months. If you fail two (2)

join the Board Exam Study Group Circle to find others who are

times, you may retake the exam a third and final time. While

looking for study partners.

the HNCB no longer requires proof of additional education
in order to take the exam a third and final time, it is strongly

When can I take the exam?

recommended. You will not be allowed to sit for the exam

Please allow a minimum of four (4) weeks for the HNCB to

again after failing a third time. A retest fee of $250 will apply

process your application. All documents must be received at

for each retest. Click here to read the Board Exam Appeals

least four (4) weeks prior to the date of your exam. This gives

Policy.

us time to review your documents. Exam applicants who do
not allow the requested four (4) weeks may be required to

If I fail the exam, do I need to retake the entire exam

reschedule the exam for a later date.

or just the domains I failed?
You will need to retake the entire exam.

How much time is allotted to take the exam? Will
there be a break?

What title do I use after passing the exam?

You will have three (3) hours to complete the exam. There will

Please continue to use the title granted you by your school of

be one five (5) minute bathroom break. If you have a medical

study. In addition, you may use “Board Certified in Holistic

need for a longer break, please provide advanced notice in the

Nutrition®” or “BCHN®.” Always check your state laws to

designated area on your exam application, and one will be

ensure you are practicing legally. Please see “Becoming Board

scheduled for you.

Certified in Holistic Nutrition®” in the beginning of this study

Know your needs. You are encouraged to have water and a

guide.

small snack to sustain you during the exam.

Those who also meet the requirements for the CNP may use

What is a passing grade?

the additional title, “Certified Nutrition Professional” or “CNP.”

An overall exam grade of 70% correct is required to pass the

Please see “Becoming a Certified Nutrition Professional” in the

exam.

beginning of this study guide.

How long will it take to get exam results, and will I

Do I need to renew my certification? What are the

be given grades by domain?

requirements for maintaining board certification

Overall Pass/Fail exam results and percentages scored per

and (if I qualify) my CNP status?

domain will display immediately upon completing your online
exam. Also, you will be notified by mail within two (2) to four (4)
weeks of exam completion. The HNCB will contact each exam

You will NOT need to sit for the exam again. However, you will
be required to remain a Professional member in good
standing with the NANP and fulfill Continuing Education

candidate with their exam results via email and U.S. Mail.

Credits (CECs) requirements to renew and maintain your

What is the exam accommodation policy?

Board Certification and (if applicable) your CNP status. CECs

To evaluate requests for exam accommodations, the Holistic

are due at the time of Professional Membership renewal. No

Nutrition Credentialing Board (HNCB) requires documentation

additional CECs are required to maintain CNP status.

from a licensed healthcare provider qualified to diagnose the

Additionally, you will be required to do the following every two

reported condition. The letter, on official letterhead and signed

(2) years to renew and maintain your board certification:

by the provider, must verify the diagnosed condition with the

Provide a copy of your current resume or Curriculum

relevant ICD-10 code, state the date of onset or approximate

Vitae

timeframe, describe the functional limitations related to exam-

Provide proof of current liability insurance (if you are in

taking, and recommend specific accommodations with

clinical practice, NOT required if you work in an

medical rationale. All documentation will be kept confidential

educational or research setting and do not provide

and used solely to determine appropriate exam

nutrition consulting services. Also not required if your

accommodations in accordance with the Americans with

County, Township, etc. does not require Professional

Disabilities Act (ADA).

Liability Insurance to lawfully practice.)
Complete the Board Re-Certification Form (provided via

Letters from licensed practitioners must be mailed to the

email when your re-credentialing time nears)

HNCB directly and via U.S. Mail to:

If you are a BCHN® (Candidate), you must submit

Holistic Nutrition Credentialing Board

evidence of your 500 Contact Hours (see Contact Hours

P.O. Box 348028
Sacramento, CA 95834
Letters received from the test-taker will not be considered.

16

Form for the required materials)

8. Preparing for the Exam – Study Tips
Join or Form a Study Group
Study groups can be a helpful way to break up the monotony of studying for a board exam. This exam offers five
(5) distinct domains which can be assigned to various members of a study group. Some domains are much larger
than others, so the larger domains could easily be split in half. A study group of five (5) or more is ideal.
Members of NANP can join or organize a study group via their myNANP account.
Click here to log in and join the Board Exam Study Group Circle.

Eight Helpful Tips for Studying for the Board Exam
1. Review reading materials from your holistic

Everyone has their own time clock, and many of

nutrition education program. The HNCB exam

us find we are significantly more productive at

is based on the NANP’s rigorous educational

certain times of day. If you know this to be true for

standards, which our approved schools have met.

you, then plan your study times (and perhaps even

Going back to your school’s materials as a refresher

you exam!) at your own optimum peak hours to

for this exam is a great first step toward success.

maximize the benefits of your study time.

2. Study the textbooks recommended in this

7. Take excellent care of yourself. As holistic nutrition

study guide thoroughly. The exam questions

professionals, no one knows this better than we

and answers are pulled directly from the

do! Yet, we sometimes find it easier to help others

recommended textbooks. It’s essential to study

take good care than we do for ourselves. Make the

this material.

commitment to treat yourself with special care
while studying for your board exam. Get plenty

3. Review questions and answers from your past

of good nutrition – you are an expert in this area

exams from school. Exam questions are usually

after all! Get plenty of sleep and do your favorite

important information that your teachers want

exercise regimen, so you can relieve some stress

you to remember for a reason. Going back and

and maximize your brain power and stay focused.

reviewing those questions and answers can be
a great strategy for reminding you what was

8. Don’t compare yourself to others. Talk about a

impor tant .

slippery slope! Forget what others are doing, what
they’re good at, and how well they may perform.

4. Review your old case studies, essays, research

This time is about YOU and you alone. Do your best

papers, projects, etc. Looking back at your own

to focus only on yourself and your needs, so you

work can often jar your memory about specific

can put your best foot forward.

information, resources, and tools. Using what you
have already is a great strategy for success!
5. Focus on your personal areas of weakness. We all
have them, and there’s no shame… only if you don’t
learn from your weaknesses will they remain your
weaknesses. Take the time to really delve deeply
and determine what you need to work on more
closely. Doing this hard work can often make or
break any daunting task.
6. Study at the best time of day for your unique self.

17

8. Preparing for the Exam – Study Tips (continued)
Strategies for Exam Preparation
The following provides a general strategy to aid you in preparing for the exam. Remember that this board exam
is intended to test for entry-level knowledge and skill in holistic nutrition.

Types of Exam Questions
Exams of all types typically have questions that test your knowledge but also your critical thinking ability. The
developers of the board exam in holistic nutrition used Bloom’s Taxonomy to classify questions into a hierarchical
ordering of cognitive skills. The types of questions you will encounter on the exam include:

Examples
Remember

Recall specific information

Understand

Grasp meaning of materials

Apply

Use information in new situations

Analyze

Identify links among ideas

Evaluate

Use knowledge to make judgements

Create

Develop something new

When & How to Study
Preparation for the exam can start as early as the day you enter a nutrition education program. Maintaining a
compilation of key concepts as you progress through your education creates a simple means of reviewing the
basics of holistic nutrition. However, due to time constraints, many people begin their more targeted exam
preparation immediately following graduation. Three to six months of focused study time provides adequate
preparation for most people.

18

General Exam Preparation Tips
1. Budget your time; make sure you have sufficient
time to study so you are well prepared for the exam.

Prepare a Study Schedule

2. Use “Section 9: Exam Structure/Content Outline”

schedule and stick to it. By preparing ahead, you will

in this study guide to help direct your studies.

save time, cover more topics, and retain more. The

Whether studying alone or with a group, have a study

study group will work best if all participants follow the

3. Join the study group circle or take an exam
preparation course.

same board review material (see “Suggested Materials
to Study”).

4. Review the sample problems, source books, and
resources listed in this section.

Strategies for Answering Exam
Questions

5. Have your study material readily available: lecture
notes, course textbooks, study guides, and any
other relevant material.

1. Read the directions slowly and carefully before
beginning the exam.

6. Find a comfortable and quiet place to study with
good lighting, airflow, and little distraction (try
avoiding your own bed; it is very tempting to just
lie down and take a nap).

2. Read the question in its entirety before answering.
Make sure you understand what the question is
asking, and anticipate the answer before looking at
your options.

7. Begin by studying the most important
information first.

3. Answer the simple questions first to help build up
your confidence for the harder questions.
NOTE: You will be able to bookmark and skip

8. Learn the general concepts first; don’t worry about
learning the details until you have learned the
main ideas.

questions within each domain of the exam.
However, skipped and bookmarked questions

9. Take short breaks frequently, as your memory
retains the information that you study at the
beginning and the end better than what you study
in the middle.

must be addressed before you can move to the
next domain.
4. Eliminate answers you know are not right.

10. Spread out your studying; you’ll learn more by
studying a little every day or every week instead of
waiting to cram at the last minute. By studying
daily, the material will stay in your long-term
memory, but if you try to study at the last moment,
the material will only reside in your short-term
memory and you may easily forget.

5. Read all the choices completely and carefully
before choosing your answer.
6. If you are uncertain of the correct answer, move on
to the next question and return later.
7. Ultimately, if you don’t know the correct answer,
always take an educated guess and select an
answer.

11. Make sure you understand the material well; don’t
just read through the material and try to memorize
everything.

8. Avoid repeatedly changing your answer; usually
your first choice is the right one, unless you
misread the question.

12. Test yourself or have someone test you on the
material to determine your weak and strong areas.
Using the review questions at the end of a chapter
is helpful.

9. Stay relaxed. If you begin to get nervous take a
few deep breaths slowly to relax yourself, and then
resume.

13. For some, listening to relaxing music such as
classical or jazz on a low volume can help keep you
focused and energized.

Being well prepared for the exam is the best way
to reduce exam-taking anxiety!

14. Avoid studying past the time you usually go to
sleep, as you may be tempted to go to sleep.
Instead, study in the afternoon or early evening.
If you are a morning person try studying in the
morning.
15. Create note cards or summary sheets that
consolidate key ideas or information onto a
page that can be quickly reviewed many times.
Rewriting your notes can also be helpful.
16. Maintain a positive attitude while preparing for the
exam and during the exam.
19

Materials to Study
A good place to start is with a thorough review of your training materials, books, class notes, seminar
handbooks, and case records. Additionally, “Section IV: Exam Structure/Content Outline” in this study guide
may help focus your studies.

The following texts and sources were used to source the questions and
answers in the exam:
Advanced Human Nutirtion, 5th Edition
The Craft of Research, 4th Ed. by Booth, et al.
The Encyclopedia of Healing Foods by M. Murray & J. Pizzorno, et al.
Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine, Revised 3rd Edition by M. Murray & J. Pizzorno
Hole’s Essentials of Human Anotomy & Physiology, Fourteenth Edition
Nutrition Counseling & Education Skill Development, 4th Edition
The Pantry Principle by Mira Dessy, NE
NANP’s Code of Ethics
Nutrition Professionals’ Scope of Practice & Standard of Care
NANP’s Legislative Affairs Map
One approach to studying includes an exhaustive review of these materials, utilizing chapter summaries to
help highlight key concepts, and answering questions at the end of the chapter (where provided) to assure
comprehension of the material.
NOTE: Be advised that to keep this exam up-to-date with current industry studies and information, the study
materials may change from time to time. If you have purchased the study guide well in advance of sitting for the
exam, please be sure to confirm that the texts remain the same.

Exam Structure/ Content Outline/Key Concepts/Sample Questions
The exam is comprised of 151 multiple-choice, multiple answer, true/false, short answer, and matching terms with
definition questions that assess an individual’s grasp of the competencies and facets of expertise in holistic
nutrition. The exam is only available online via ProctorU.

Core exam content areas include:
Domain I:
Domain II:
Domain III:
Domain IV:
Domain V:

Food & Nutrition
Fundamentals of Anatomy, Physiology, & Biochemistry
Domain III: Counseling/Ethics/Scope of Practice
Nutrition in Practice
Research

The following domains, tasks, and knowledge statements were delineated by the Holistic Nutrition Credentialing
Board (HNCB) and validated through a role delineation study. The number of exam items allotted to each
domain was determined through analysis and discussion of the results of the role delineation study conducted
through the NANP by the HNCB.

20

Domain I: Food & Nutrition Key Concepts
35% of total exam questions
Guide and educate clients on safe and effective use of whole foods, targeted nutritional support, and holistic
nutrition modalities to build health.

Tasks:

3. Components of a nutritionally balanced diet

Guide and educate clients on the principles of
1.
holistic nutrition to create optimal health using
whole food nutrition.

4. Nutrient composition of foods, including vitamins,
minerals, proteins, carbohydrates, fats, antioxidants
and phytonutrients.

2. Guide and educate clients on environmental
influences that may contribute to or negate
optimal health.

5. Therapeutic use of whole foods: whole vs. refined,
fresh vs. processed, organic vs. conventional,
therapeutic properties of specific whole foods

3. Interview clients to obtain a full-spectrum history
to assess nutritional imbalances and systemic
weaknesses, including verbal interview, written
questionnaires, and visual assessment.

6. Dietary systems/philosophies/schools of thought
including, vegan, vegetarian, and macrobiotic
7. Food safety guidelines and the safe and effective
use of nutrient-dense foods, including, culinary
herbs and herbal teas and whole foods-based
supplements

4. Evaluate subjective and objective data to identify
risks for interactions between medications, foods,
and nutritional supplements.

Key Concepts to Study for Domain I:

5. Analyze food intake records for areas of nutrient
imbalance.

Acid/alkaline forming

6. Educate clients on macronutrient balance, food

foods

selection and preparation, and fluid requirements.

Amino acids/proteins

Knowledge:
1.

Anti-inflammatory foods
Anti-nutrients/phytic acid

Guiding principles of holistic nutrition:

Glycemic index/load
Histamines
Lectins
Minerals
Organic foods

Understanding nutrition as the nourishment of
an individual’s physical, emotional, and spiritual
well-being

Antioxidants

Biochemical individuality

Culinary herbs

Whole/natural foods as the best sources for

Detoxification

optimal nutrition

Digestive & elimination

foods

No miracle nutrients that will cure all ills

support/gut microbiome

Salicylates

Dietary supplementation as health-promoting

Electrolytes

Carbohydrates

when used in the appropriate form, dose, and
frequency, but not a substitute for a good diet
Nutritional well-being as the balance between
a person’s health-promoting diet and
lifestyle habits, and the nutritionally negating
environmental and lifestyle influences
2. Components of holistic nutrition and holistic
nutrition modalities: seasonal, whole, organic foods;
biochemical individuality; conceptual/web-like
thinking; conscious eating; environmental toxins;
belief systems; cleansing/detoxification programs,
fasting, juicing, and nutritional supplements

Phytonutrients
Prebiotics
Probiotics/fermented

Special nutrient needs in

Environmental toxins

different life stages

Enzymes

Sweeteners

Fatty acids/ketones/lipids

Total load

Fiber

Toxic metals

Food additives

Types of diets

Food composition

Vitamins

Food sensitivity/allergy

Water

Food-based supplements

Whole foods

Free radicals

21

Oxalates

Domain I: Food & Nutrition Sample Questions
[answers provided on Page 34]

1. Coenzyme Q10 plays a central role in which of the following functions?
a. mitochondrial function and cellular energy production
b. mitochondrial function and cell membrane fluidity
c. bone formation and density
d. vitamin E synthesis

2. Which one of the following statements about carbohydrates is false?
a. High intake of carbohydrates in the form of fiber is characteristic for the Western diet.
b. Carbohydrates in the form of glucose serve as the most basic energy source for all cells in the body.
c. Organic whole grains, fruits, and vegetables are good sources of carbohydrates.
d. Refined carbohydrates lack fiber and many other beneficial nutrients.

3. The following is an ingredient label from a typical store-bought, boxed breakfast cereal:
Puffed rice, whole grain wheat, whole grain spelt flakes, millet, almonds, sunflower seeds, honey, raisins
(sulfites), cornstarch, dextrose, high fructose corn syrup, caramel color, niacinamide, thiamine hydrochloride,
pyridoxine hydrochloride, folate, tocopherol. (BHT added to package material to maintain product freshness).
How many added chemical preservatives and/or colors are listed on the cereal label?
a. 1

b. 2

c. 3

d. 4

4. The Solanaceae (nightshade) food family includes:
a. eggplant, peppers, and squashes
b. tomatoes, potatoes, and peppers
c. lemons, oranges, and grapefruits
d. broccoli, cauliflower, and Brussels sprouts

5. Fermented foods, such as yogurt, have bacteria that can digest lactose.
True or False

6. EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexanenoic acid) are _______________ fatty acids.
a. omega 3
b. omega 6
c. omega 9
d. omega 12

7. Heme iron is found in ________________, and is absorbed better than other iron forms.
a. plant tissue
b. animal tissue
c. synthetic supplements
d. cast iron pans

8. The cruciferous vegetable most closely associated with healing ulcers is:
a. cabbage
b. kale
c. glutamine
d. broccoli sprouts

22

Domain I: Food & Nutrition Sample Questions
(continued)

9. The mineral ___________ is the major component in glucose tolerance factor.
a. magnesium
b. calcium
c. potassium
d. chromium

10. Vitamin K is a water-soluble vitamin.
a. True
b. False
11.

In relation to athletic performance, caffeine can influence performance by the following means except:
a. Caffeine may increase plasma epinephrine levels.
b. Caffeine may have direct action on skeletal muscle performance.
c. Caffeine may possibly prolong glycogen stores.
d. Caffeine consumption in minuscule amounts prior to competition may approach the legal limitation.

12. A client seeks to obtain his vitamins and minerals through a whole foods diet. Which food is a rich
source of calcium?
a. collard greens
b. raspberries
c. kiwi
d. black beans

23

Domain II: Fundamentals of Anatomy,
Physiology, & Biochemistry Key Concepts
15% of total exam questions
Demonstrate proficiency in the understanding and application of anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry
as they relate to human health.

Tasks:
1.

Key Concepts to Study for Domain II
Acid/alkaline balance

Describe the function of bodily systems

2. Understand cellular function

Cardiovascular/circulatory
systems

Knowledge:
1.

Cellular structure & metabolism

Structure

Detoxification

2. Function
Digestive, absorptive, and microbiological
imbalances

Digestive system

Detoxification and biotransformation imbalances
Oxidation-reduction imbalances

Endocrine system
Genito-urinary system
Immune system

Hormonal and neurotransmitter imbalances

Integumentary system

Immune and inflammatory imbalances

Lymphatic system

Structural imbalances, from cellular membrane

Musculoskeletal system

function to musculoskeletal system

Nervous system
3. Anatomical structure and function of all bodily

Reproductive system

systems

Respiratory system

24

Domain II: Fundamentals of Anatomy,
Physiology, & Biochemistry Sample Questions
[answers provided on Page 34]

1.What are the three distinct yet interconnected
series of cellular respiration reactions?
a. glycolysis, citricacidcycle,and the electron

6. Enzymes are regarded as catalysts because
they:
a. only act on a specific substrate

transport chain

b. speed the rate of metabolic reactions without being

b. methylation, sulfation, glucoronidation
c. transamination, glycation, oxidative phosphorylation

consumed in the process
c. never trigger oxidative damage to surrounding cells

d. glycolysis, glycation, glucoronidation

d. are complex proteins

2. Which best describes a bolus of “chyme?”

7. Adequate secretion of HCl and intrinsic factor
are required for the absorption of:

a. the digestive secretions from the pancreas
b. the fecal material found in the colon
c. the semifluid mass of food particles and gastric juice

a. vitamin D

d. the lymphatic fluid contained in the lymph nodes

b. vitamin B12
c. essential fatty acids
d. protein

3. Cholesterol:
a. slows down fat absorption in the small intestine

8. Which one of the following hormones has the
least effect on glucose metabolism?

b. initiates catabolism of osteocytes
c. is used to synthesize steroid hormones

a. cortisol

d. increases the rate of liver detoxification

b. epinephrine

4. The aggregation of lymph nodules located
throughout the mucosal lining of the ilium
region of the small intestine is called:

c. aldosterone
d. glucagon

a. lymphocytes
b. Peyer’s patches
c. lacteals
d. lysosomes

5. Amenorrhea is:
a. unusually heavy menstruation
b. a female’s first menstrual cycle
c. painful menstrual cycles
d. an absence of menstrual flow due to hormonal
imbalances

25

Domain III: Counseling/Ethics/Scope of Practice
10% of total exam questions
Provides a foundation of knowledge about:
behavior change models and effective counseling strategies commonly used in lifestyle change education.
NANP’s Code of Ethics, Scope of Practice, and the governing nutrition laws of the state.
The focus when reviewing the content should be on the counseling skills, scope of practice, ethics, and the
governing nutrition laws of the state rather than on specific nutritional aspects.

Tasks:

Key Concepts to Study for Domain III

1. Build client/counselor relationships which result

Assessment tools, including:

in successful lifestyle change outcomes in a

24 Hour Recall

professional manner.

Client Assessment Questionnaire

2. Assist clients to define health goals; work with

Assess Client Readiness to Change

clients to develop and implement realistic

Client/Consultant Relationships

nutritional support programs; apply the
learned strategies and techniques for behavior
modification and improving client communication

Effective Counseling Skills, including:

and adherence to the nutrition program.

Characteristics of effective counselors
Listening Skills

3. Understand the logistics of counseling across
cultures and in group settings.

Nonverbal Counseling Skills

4. Adhere to the principles of NANP’s Code of Ethics,

Recognizing Professional Boundaries & Limitations

the requirements of NANP’s Scope of Practice, and

Behavior Modification

state nutrition practice laws.

Client Resistance

Knowledge:

Barriers to change

1. How your own traits and life experience impact the

Intercultural Counseling

client/counselor relationship.

Group Counseling

2. How to apply the learned counseling skills and use
assessment tools to build a clear picture of each

Motivational Counseling, including:

client’s unique situation and nutritional needs to

Role of Empathy

increase positive outcomes.

Building self-confidence

3. How to assess client readiness to make lifestyle

Use of Rewards

and behavior changes.

Lapse/Relapse Prevention

4. How to identify and address barriers to change;
client resistance to change; and lapse/relapse

Setting Goals

episodes.

Cognitive Restructuring

5. Understand the standards used to determine the

Professionalism

propriety of conduct in relationships with clients,
colleagues, members of allied professions and the

NANP’s Code of Ethics NANP’s

public .
6. Know the extent and limitations of a holistic

Scope of Practice State Nutrition

nutrition professional’s Scope of Practice.

Practice Regulations

7. Define Exclusive Scope of Practice, Title Protection,
and No Law/Certification states.

26

Domain III: Counseling/Ethics/Scope of
Practice Sample Questions
[answers provided on Page 34]

1. When people ask what a holistic nutrition professional does, comparing yourself to “a doctor
who treats with food” is an appropriate representation of your education and professional
credentials.
True or False

2. One of the challenges of nutrition consulting is recognizing the boundaries between
nutrition counseling and psychotherapy. Which one of the following is an appropriate
response when a client begins talking about serious psychological issues?
a. listen respectfully and change the topic as soon as appropriate
b. listen attentively, acknowledge the client’s feelings, and offer practical advice
c. inform the client that such issues are beyond your scope of practice and suggest she see a therapist
qualified to deal with her problem
d. deal with the issue by providing nutrition information related to the problem and give examples of how it
has helped other clients with similar problems

3. Which one of the following would be least successful as a nutrition and lifestyle counseling
strategy?
a. listen to your client’s story without passing judgment on his thoughts, behaviors, or physical self
b. encourage your client to identify and resolve barriers to change
c. support negative self-talk to change destructive lifestyle habits, e.g., “I am going to die of a heart attack if I
keep eating these potato chips.”
d. help your clients identify solutions that have worked for them in the past that may be helpful now to make
successful lifestyle changes

4. An effective behavior intervention strategy is to reinforce successful dietary changes with
a reward. Which one of the following is not a major factor to consider when establishing
rewards?
a. Rewards should be planned to come as soon as possible after the improved behavior.
b. Rewards should be food related when the change is diet related.
c. Rewards should be timed to come after the successful behavior change; not before.
d. Rewards should be well defined – what and how much

5. In an Exclusive Scope of Practice State, a holistic nutrition professional _______ allowed to
assess a client’s nutrient status and provide individualized dietary recommendations.
a. is
b. is not

6. Referral to an appropriate qualified health professional may be necessary when the needs of
the client are outside the scope of a nutrition consultants training and expertise. Identify in
which situation the consultant need not refer to another health professional, if the nutrition
consultant does not have training in any other health field.
a. when the client discloses past unresolved sexual abuse
b. when the client confides that they have suicidal tendencies
c. the client has a current serious eating disorder
d. the client relates a history of yo-yo dieting

27

Domain IV: Nutrition in Practice Key Concepts
30% of total exam questions
Practical application of the principles of holistic nutrition in prevention and support during all stages of life.

Tasks:

Knowledge:
1. Relationship between food choices and nutritional

1. Educate and consult with individuals or groups on.
Whole food nutrition principles, biochemical

well-being

individuality, and diet and lifestyle habits toward

2. Nutrient ingestion, digestion, absorption,

achieving optimal health with a strong focus on

metabolism, and excretion

preventative dietary strategies.

3. Effects of common disease states, clinical

2. Provide educational material to assist clients in

conditions, or altered metabolism on nutritional

understanding nature of imbalance(s) or area(s) of

well-being

weakness, defining goals, and developing realistic

4. How diet, lifestyle, and nutritional supplementation

action plans.

can be used to effectively and safely prevent or

3. Identify potential for interactions between medical

support health imbalances

therapies and holistic nutrition approaches.

5. When and how to use basic herbal support safely

4. Guide clients to define health goals and
means of achieving them nutritionally through

6. How clients’ health history and symptomology

implementation of an individualized nutritional

relates to nutrient deficiencies or excesses

program that may include the use of specific foods,

7. Which assessment tools holistic nutrition

menu planning, environmental controls, dietary

consultants can legally use, and understanding

supplements, herbs, and/or lifestyle modifications.

their implementation and value

5. Consult with, work with, and refer to other health

8. Basic understanding of the most common

professionals to provide ongoing assessment

laboratory tests (cholesterol, thyroid function, etc.)

and program modifications to create optimal

9. Understanding that successful resolution or

effectiveness in achieving clients’ health goals.

prevention of health imbalances depends on
identifying and addressing underlying causes

28

Domain IV: Nutrition in Practice (continued)
Key Concepts to Study for Domain IV
NOTE: The question bank for this domain is very large. The questions you will be asked while taking the exam
will contain some, but not all of the key concepts listed for this domain.

Common imbalances &
diseases of
the circulatory/
cardiovascular system
Anemia
Angina
High/low cholesterol
Hypo/hypertension
Varicose veins

Immune system

Reproductive system

Assessment tools

Allergies (food &
environmental)

Benign prostate
hyperplasia

Basal body
temperature

Influenza

Fibrocystic breast
disease

Body mass index

Integumentary system
Acne

Hives

Adrenal fatigue

Rosacea

Hypo/hyperthyroidism
Gastrointestinal system
Candidiasis
Celiac disease
Crohn’s disease
Constipation
Diarrhea
Diverticulitis/
diverticulosis
Dysbiosis
Gallstones
Hemorrhoids
Hypo/hyperchlorhydria
Irritable bowel
syndrome
Leaky gut syndrome

Premenstrual
syndrome

Eczema

Psoriasis

Hypo/hyperglycemia

Menopause

Dermatitis

Endocrine system

Diabetes

Infertility

Respiratory system
Asthma
Bronchitis

Musculoskeletal system

Common cold

Gout

Ear infections

Osteoarthritis

Sinusitis

Osteopenia/
osteoporosis

Urinary system
Cystitis

Rheumatoid arthritis

Kidney stones

Neurological system

Vision

ADD/ADHD

Cataracts

Alzheimer’s/dementia

Glaucoma

Carpal tunnel
syndrome

Macular degeneration
Multiple system

Insomnia

imbalances

Migraines

Chronic fatigue

Mood disorders –

syndrome

depression, anxiety

Fibromyalgia

Multiple sclerosis
Restless leg syndrome
Seasonal affective
disorder (SAD)

Ulcer

29

Client questionnaires
Dietary intake records
Lab assessments
Personal case history
pH testing
Commonly used
concepts
Biochemical
individuality
Drug/herb/nutrient
interactions
Total load
Other
Nutrient
supplementation
Stress management
Weight management

Domain IV: Nutrition in Practice Sample Questions
[answers provided on Page 34]

1. A client’s health history, indicating long-term use of birth control pills, several courses of
broad- spectrum antibiotics for chronic bladder infections, allergies or sensitivity reactions to
numerous foods and chemicals, chronic fatigue, depression, and chronic gas and bloating,
may benefit most from which dietary approach?
a. weight loss diet
b. candida control diet
c. diabetes diet
d. celiac diet

2. Which one of the following is not a helpful question in differentiating between symptoms
related to seasonal allergies and the common cold?
a. is there a fever?
b. is fatigue a predominant symptom?
c. is there clear evidence of a respiratory infection?
d. is there a history of environmental allergies during this time of year?

3. Which of the following is not associated with developing a peptic ulcer?
a. high fiber diet
b. smoking
c. low gastric acid production
d. milk allergy

4. Which of the following foods are most likely to aggravate rheumatoid arthritis?
a. fish and olive oil
b. tomatoes and potatoes
c. turmeric and ginger
d. blueberries and strawberries

5. Some of the most common lab test results brought in by clients are for TSH and thyroid
hormones, which help determine thyroid function. If the TSH levels are elevated and thyroid
hormone levels are lowered in the blood, it usually indicates a compromise in hormone
production by the _________________________.
a. thyroid
b. pituitary
c. adrenals
d. hypothalamus

6. Causative factors of PMS are primarily related to dysfunction of the following except:
a. liver
b. kidneys
c. brain chemistry
d. thyroid

30

Domain IV: Nutrition in Practice Sample Questions
(continued)
7. The following conditions are related to obesity except:
a. sleep apnea
b. osteoarthritis
c. Addison’s disease
d. cancer

8. The ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) is a laboratory test used to determine:
a. gluten sensitivity levels
b. intestinal pH
c. antibodies to food
d. nutrient deficiencies

9. The following are important components of a heart-healthy regimen except:
a. regular exercise
b. calcium supplementation
c. nuts and seeds
d. optimal vitamin D levels

10. Which of the following is not recommended for the improvement of depression?
a. identifying and removing food allergens
b. diet high in animal protein
c. vitamin D
d. saffron

11.______ is a natural stimulant laxative often found in formulas to relieve chronic constipation.
a. senna
b. psyllium
c. berberine
d. peppermint oil

12. Dietary support for type II diabetes should emphasize:
a. oligosaccharides
b. moderately high intake of saturated fatty acids
c. primarily fresh fruit and some meats
d. high-fiber foods and complex carbohydrates

31

Domain V: Research Key Concepts
10% of total exam questions
Understand and apply the basic guidelines of performing and reporting research, using convincing arguments.

Tasks:

Key Concepts to Study for Domain V

Retrieve, evaluate, and compile in writing scientific

Abstract

data regarding nutrition to:

Bibliography

assist in education of client;

Citation guidelines

assist in development of safe and effective

Context

nutritional programs to promote clients’

Critical reading

nutritional well-being;

Internet sources

provide supporting documentation for nutritional

Keywords

program to clients’ other health professionals;

Plagiarism

promote the benefits of holistic nutrition by

Reliability of sources

writing articles for magazines, newspapers, and

Trailhead

organizations.

Types of source material
Warrant

Knowledge:

Writing up your research

1. How to access and understand existing scientific
literature and other relevant resources

Choosing topics
Documenting research

2. How to employ critical thinking to assist in

Introductions and conclusions

research and determine validity of research studies

Making good arguments

3. How to identify reliable resources for research

Note taking

4. How and why thinking like your readers helps you

Organization

be a better writer

Quoting and paraphrasing

5. How to organize your research: use convincing
arguments, write clearly and concisely, and

Sentence revision

maintain integrity

Using tables and charts
Writing for your reader(s)

32

Domain V: Research Sample Questions
[answers provided on Page 34]

1. Which one of the following is least helpful in determining whether a source is reliable and
worth considering?
a. the publisher is a university press
b. article is peer reviewed
c. author is a reputable scholar
d. article includes several quotes from a well-known author

2. Doing your own research helps you judge the research reports you read. For instance, you
read a newspaper article that states that per The American Journal of Cardiology, vitamin
E supplementation increases coronary episodes in the elderly. Which one of the following
questions, in this case, is least helpful in analyzing this report for accuracy?
a. Is the American Journal of Cardiology a peer-reviewed journal?
b. What were the specific methods used to collect the information and how were the original studies
conducted?
c. Is this claim based on the primary source?
d. Is there a complete citation or bibliography list so I can look up the original research?

3. A basic guideline of research is to look at your argument as your reader would, since they
may have a lot at stake in a different solution. Your reader is judging not just what you say
but how you say it. Which of the following statements is false?
a. while you may criticize the conclusions of your source, don’t downgrade the author
b. anticipate that your readers will question the accuracy of your research
c. take note of alternative positions in your sources (a different solution, cause, or line of reasoning) and
choose those you need to address to keep a strong argument
d. conceding that you don’t have all the answers to your research question is never a good approach as it
will cause readers to question all your arguments

4. The following are important guidelines to follow when considering quotations in your
research report except:
a. Block quotes are only necessary if your report has quotes from more than one primary source.
b. Use direct quotes rather than paraphrase when you use the work of others as primary data or when their
words are particularly significant to your claim.
c. Work towards a balance; if you quote too often your reader may feel you offer too little of your own work,
but quote too little and they may think your claims lack sufficient evidence.
d. When quoting use square brackets to indicate insertions and ellipses to indicate dropped words.

5. Which of the following statements about plagiarism is false?
a. Most writers who plagiarize do so inadvertently because they fail to take careful notes.
b. Using someone’s ideas, but not exact words, without giving them credit is plagiarism.
c. If you paraphrase closely but do not quote exactly you do not need to cite the source.
d. You risk appearing to have plagiarized, even though you didn’t, if you come up with an idea on your own,
but then discover that someone else thought of it first and you don’t cite the prior source.

6. Which of the following represents the best topic for a research report considering the
basic principle of neither choosing a topic that is too broad or one that is too narrow?
a. the benefits of probiotic supplementation in food allergy
b. probiotics and intestinal health
c. probiotics and immunity
d. lactobacillus acidophilus response to dietary fiber after antibiotic treatment in those with low HCl

33

Answers to sample questions

Domain I: Food & Nutrition
Answers:

Domain IV: Nutrition in Practice
Answers:

1. a

7. b

1. b

7. c

2. a

8. a

2. b

8. c

3. c

9. d

3. a

9. b

4. b

10. b

4. b

10. b

5. True

11. d

5. a

11. a

6. a

12. a

6. b

12. d

Domain II: Fundamentals
of Anatomy, Physiology &
Biochemistry
Answers:
1. a

5. d

2. c

6. b

3. c

7. b

4. b

8. c

Domain V: Research
Answers:
1. d

4. a

2. a

5. c

3. d

6. a

Domain III: Counseling/
Ethics/Scope of Practice
Answers:
1. False

5. b

2. c

6. d

3. c
4. b

34

Since 1985

National Association of
Nutrition Professionals
35

